[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Have you ever
had a lucid dream,
an out-of-body experience, or a
mystical moment that caused you
to change your view about
the world we live in?
Have you ever wondered
how that happened
or even why it happened?
And have you ever had
the desire to have
another similar experience?
It is that transcendental moment
where we abandon everything
that we know and we
begin to experience
the realm of the unknown, as
if the mystery of the self
is being revealed to us.
I'm your host Dr. Joe Dispenza,
and in the previous episode,
we compared the realms of
space-time and time-space.
The material world, the realm
of three-dimensional reality,
the world of the senses,
where everything takes time
to happen, to the
immaterial world,
the realm of the fifth
dimension of reality and beyond.
The world beyond the senses,
made of energy and frequency.
In the next two
episodes I would like
to demystify the
mystical by combining
the science of that lucid
world that seems so real to us
in the moment with
ancient wisdom
to show you latent systems
in your brain and body
that once activated
will take you to realms
beyond space and time.
It is in this place that
ancient civilizations,
which thrived for thousands of
years, were the most interested
in.
It is my hope that everything
you learn in this episode
will demystify the
mystical so that you
can begin to explore a
transcendental world that
exists beyond your senses.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Let's start with introducing
you to the pineal gland and two
important neurotransmitters,
serotonin and melatonin.
Let's start with the
word pe-nial or pineal,
both pronunciations are correct.
Pineal or pe-nial
meaning pinecone shape.
The pineal gland, it looks
just like a pinecone.
There's no coincidence that
it's called pinecone shaped.
Now, the pineal gland
is a tiny little gland
a little bigger than the
size of a grain of rice.
It's right between the
back of your throat
and the back of your head.
And it's important to
know exactly where it
is because when we begin
to practice activating
the pineal gland,
you're going to have
to become aware of
where it exists and put
your attention on it.
And where you place
your attention
is where you place your energy.
And the more you
pay attention to it,
the more you become aware of
it, the more you stay present
with it, the more you
begin to put energy
to begin to activate it.
The pineal gland is very
sensitive to visible light,
light that's coming from
the sun or light that's
coming from lights that
we have in our homes
or in our offices, that
wavelength of light.
Once light is perceived
when our eyes are open,
the frequency of light is
picked up by the optic nerve.
And it sends a signal right to
a nucleus in the brain called
the suprachiasmic nucleus.
That nucleus signals the
sympathetic nervous system,
which signals the pineal gland.
And the pineal gland gets
busy making a neurotransmitter
called serotonin.
And serotonin is the
daytime neurotransmitter
that once activated begins
to cause us to become aware
that we're local
in space and time,
and we become conscious
that we're our bodies
in an environment and in time.
And it produces a certain
brainwave frequency called
beta brainwave frequencies.
It is beta brainwaves
that causes
us to put most of our
attention on the outer world.
Now, the release of
serotonin then gets us up
and gets us busy during the day.
This graphic represents
that small frequency
of visible light that exists
in the entire electromagnetic
spectrum.
And it's that tiny little
sliver of all of reality
that our eyes and our senses
are the most sensitive to.
When there is an
inhibition of light
or there's a lack of light, the
lack of the wavelength of light
that usually hits the back
of the eye, the optic nerve,
begins to diminish the release
of serotonin in the brain.
And so the inhibition
of light signals
the same nucleus
in the brain called
the suprachiasmic nucleus,
which then dampens down
the sympathetic nervous system.
And now the pineal
gland begins to make
a chemical called melatonin.
And melatonin is the
nighttime neurotransmitter.
And as melatonin levels begin
to rise because of darkness
in the evening, then
all of a sudden,
we begin to slow
our brainwaves down
into alpha, and theta,
and ultimately delta.
And its melatonin then
that allows our body
to restore and regenerate.
So serotonin gets us
up in the morning,
and melatonin puts
us to bed at night.
And those are two
important neurotransmitters
that function in a rhythm
called the circadian rhythm.
And when you live in a certain
environment in a certain place
in the world, and as the sun
comes up and the sun goes down,
your brain chemistry
becomes entrained to light.
There's an amino acid
called L-tryptophan
that is the raw material or
the building block of serotonin
and melatonin.
L-tryptophan is turned
into 5-hydroxytryptophan,
which is called 5-HTP, which
then another chemical cycle
takes place, and all of a
sudden we have serotonin.
Serotonin goes through
another biological process,
biochemical process,
and it's turned
into N-acetylserotonin, which
ultimately becomes melatonin.
So very simple chemical
pathways in the pineal gland
that is the alchemist in
the back of the brain that
facilitates this process
based on the wavelength
or the frequency
of visible light.
Melatonin levels are at their
highest during a 24-hour cycle
between 1 AM and 4 AM.
And that's important
for you to know
because when we do the
meditation to activate
this ancient gland in
the back of the brain,
it's always important to know
that it's a good idea to wake
up early enough when the raw
materials are at their height.
Melatonin levels tend to go down
as stress hormone levels go up.
And that is a very,
very adaptive function
over thousands of years of
trial and error in environment.
So when there is a stressful
event, a dangerous event,
when there's a perception
of something threatening
in the environment, we turn
on that stress hormones,
the fight-or-flight nervous
system, the sympathetic nervous
system, and now we're
prepared for danger.
So as long as we're perceiving
a threat in the outer world,
it makes sense then
it's not a good idea
to go to sleep because sleeping
means you would be more
vulnerable and possibly prey.
So as melatonin levels go
down as stress hormones go up,
our sleep patterns
are interrupted
because the very raw material
that causes us to sleep
is diminished.
Now, as stress levels go down
and we're out of survival,
out of emergency mode, then
melatonin levels go up,
and the body can restore,
regenerate, and repair.
Now, melatonin,
the research on it
has been profoundly
interesting because there's
so many important
biological processes
that melatonin is involved in.
Melatonin promotes DNA
repair and replication.
It stops cortisol oversecretion
in response to stress.
In other words, if
your melatonin levels
begin to go up, your stress
hormone levels go down.
And a little administration or
a little addition of melatonin
sometimes is enough
to jump start us
to move into restorative sleep.
It also improved
carbohydrate metabolism.
Now, this is an interesting
concept because in antiquity,
when we were stressed or
living in survival, many times
it meant famine or
the lack of food.
So when the survival
gene is switched on,
all of a sudden,
now the body's going
to take carbohydrates
and store them
as fats so that we have a
reserve of energy in the body.
So people who are constantly
under stress always
are taking carbohydrates
and storing them as fats.
Melatonin tends to
break that cycle.
It lowers triglyceride levels.
It inhibited atherosclerosis
or hardening of the arteries.
It heightens both cellular and
metabolic immune responses.
It decreased certain
tumor developments
in laboratory animals.
In certain laboratory animals,
it increased lifespan by 25%.
It has a very important
neuroprotective role
in the brain.
It increases REM sleep.
It is an important free radical
scavenger, an antioxidant.
Now, antioxidant means
anti-cancer, anti-aging,
anti-heart disease, anti-stroke,
anti-neurodegenerative,
anti-inflammatory,
anti-microbial.
And I want you to remember
these important points
about melatonin
because melatonin
is essential for our bodies
to repair and regenerate.
This is the ancient symbol from
the Egyptian culture called
the Eye of Horus.
Next to it, this is what's
called a sagittal section
of the brain.
Now, if you took the
two halves of the brain,
and you divided them
right down the middle,
and you pulled them apart,
you would be looking
at a side view of the brain.
And there's a very
striking resemblance
between the limbic
brain, the seat
of the autonomic nervous
system, and the Eye of Horus.
And it's important for you to
understand that this represents
some type of inner vision.
Pineal gland has been known
to be called the third eye
because once it's stimulated
and activated to the next level,
it gives us profound
inner vision.
This is called Fibonacci's
constant or the golden mean.
If you were to follow
that golden mean right
around the circumference
of the brain,
it would wind up at the exact
spot of where the pineal gland
exists in the brain.
And many different
things in nature,
from the universe to seashells
to the inner shape of a flower
all represent this
golden mean pattern.
Now, pineal gland has
a simple vein, artery,
and nerve moving in and a vein,
artery, and nerve moving out,
and it has a very rich
and dense blood supply.
Take a look at this
article that I discovered,
"Characterisation and Potential
Role of Electromechanical
Transduction--
New Crystals in
the Pineal Gland."
Now, the abstract
says the pineal gland
is a neuroendocrine
transducer secreting
melatonin, responsible for the
physiological circadian rhythm
control.
A new form of biomineralization
has been studied
in the human pineal gland.
It consists of small
crystals that are
less than 20 microns in length.
These crystals
could be responsible
for an electromechanical
biological transduction
mechanism in the pineal gland.
Due to their structure and
their Piezoelectric properties.
Now, that's a mouthful
of words, but there's
only two words that I want
you to pay attention to--
Piezoelectric properties
and transducer.
Just remember those.
Now, in the next page, it says
the pineal gland microcrystals
appear as a stack of
thin rhombohedrons
with their flat surfaces
normal to the long axis
of the crystal.
If you were to
visualize that, you
have these calcium carbonate
or calcite crystals
that are rhombohedron
in shape that
are stacked on top of each
other in the pineal gland.
And when you apply
a mechanical stress,
and you begin to
compress those crystals,
the compression
of those crystals
begins to produce an external
electromagnetic field
or begins to take one form
of energy, mechanical stress,
and turn it into another form
of energy, an electrical charge.
These are those
rhombohedron crystals that
were in the previous article.
And you have them in
your pineal gland.
In fact, many vertebrates
have the same crystals
in their pineal gland.
Homing pigeons, as an example,
have these tiny crystals, just
like you, that
are very sensitive
to electromagnetic energy.
And because the Earth has its
own electromagnetic field,
the pigeons can actually tune
into the strongest signal,
and they can navigate from
one place to another place
because they're sensitive
to electromagnetism.
And that's information
they're picking up
that's transcendent
of their senses.
I want to talk about
Piezoelectric effects.
So Piezoelectric effect is the
ability of certain materials
to generate an electrical
charge in response
to an applied mechanical stress.
The word Piezoelectric
is derived
from the Greek piezein, which
means to squeeze or press,
and piezo in Greek,
which means to push.
Now, one of the
unique characteristics
of the Piezoelectric effect
is that it is reversible,
meaning that the
materials exhibiting
the direct
Piezoelectric effect--
that's the generation
of electricity
when stress is applied--
also exhibit a converse
Piezoelectric effect,
the generation of stress when
an electrical field is applied.
Stay with me because when
Piezoelectric material is
placed under mechanical
stress, a shifting
of positive and
negative charges centers
in the material,
which then results
in an external electrical field.
When reversed, the
outer electrical field
either stretches or compresses
the Piezoelectric material.
Now, that's a lot
of words, but I
want you to hang in there
with me now because I'm going
to demystify that process.
How is it then can we
compress those crystals
inside our brain?
How can we apply
mechanical stress.
If our brain is encased in this
ivory cavern called our skull,
how are we going to get in there
and compress those crystals?
Inside your skull,
your spinal column,
and the bone at the
base of your spine
called your sacrum is
the most delicate system
in your body called the
central nervous system.
In fact, without the aid
of your nervous system,
you couldn't digest your food,
you couldn't void your bladder,
you couldn't blink your eyes.
You couldn't move without the
aid of your nervous system.
So think of your nervous
system as the electrical wires
that run the machine.
Inside this closed
system is fluid
called cerebrospinal fluid.
And cerebrospinal fluid
has some basic functions.
It acts to create buoyancy in
the central nervous system.
It acts to have a
neuroprotective role for trauma
in case there's movement
or deceleration.
It's the fluid that protects
the brain and the spinal cord
against bony edges.
It acts to transport fluids and
other chemicals and nutrients
to different parts of the
brain in the nervous system.
And finally, it has
an important role
to enhance conductivity
or electrical charges
in the nervous system.
When you inhale, the sutures
of your skull open up.
And when you exhale, the
sutures of your skull close.
At the same time, at
the base of your spine
where that sacrum bone
exists, when you inhale,
that sacrum bone flexes back.
And when you exhale, that
sacrum bone flexes forward.
So visualize this with me.
The inhalation causes
the sutures to open up.
There's more volume
in the skull.
And the sacrum bone
flexing back causes
that cerebral spinal fluid
to drain down in gravity.
When you exhale, and the
sacrum bone flexes forward,
and the system closes down,
and those sutures close,
it begins to propagate a wave to
move the cerebral spinal fluid
up against gravity.
Now, if you were to
charge one molecule
of cerebrospinal fluid,
and tag it, and follow it
during the course of the day,
that cerebral spinal fluid
would move from the
base of your spine,
all the way up through
four different chambers
called aqueducts or
ventricles in the brain,
pass all the way through,
and come all the way down.
It would take 12 hours
for a healthy person
to begin to move that
cerebrospinal fluid all the way
through that system.
So in a sense, we flush
our brains twice a day.
What would happen if you were to
contract the intrinsic muscles
in your body, the muscles
you use for elimination,
the muscles you use
for intercourse, you
were to contract
your lower abdomen,
pull your belly button
in towards your spine,
and contract your upper abdomen?
The act of contracting
these intrinsic muscles
in the ancient yoga
tradition called the Bandhas.
As you squeeze
these muscles, you
begin to push that
cerebral spinal fluid up.
Now, what if you were to
take one slow, steady breath.
And as you slowly
follow your breath,
and you contract those
intrinsic muscles,
as you follow your breath,
and you bring that breath
all the way up to
that pineal gland,
and you hold your breath,
and you keep your attention
on that pineal gland.
That's your target.
The act of contracting
those muscles along
with the holding of
your breath would
begin to push cerebrospinal
fluid right up into your brain.
And as you begin to
hold your breath,
you're pushing that
cerebrospinal fluid right up
against the crystals
of the pineal gland
and applying a
mechanical stress.
And then the mechanical stress
begins to electrically activate
those crystals.
And when those crystals
become electrically activated,
we are turning on the radio
receiver in the brain.
Now, take a look at the
ventricles in your brain.
You have a fourth ventricle that
sits close to the brain stem.
Take a look at the
third ventricle.
That place right there,
that corner right there
is where the pineal gland
sits in the dead end.
And then you have two
lateral ventricles.
Now take a look at this.
This is the ventricles,
and it looks a lot
like that Eye of Horus
that we were talking about.
Here's the movement
of that fluid.
You can see that it comes up
from the body to the brain.
It passes through all
of those aqueducts.
It travels along the surface
of the top of the neocortex,
and it drains all
the way back down.
So then when you inhale, and
take a slow, steady breath,
and coordinate that breath with
a contraction of muscles, what
you're doing now is
you're delivering energy
into the brain by
electrically activating it.
This is a magnet.
A magnet has a north
pole and a south pole.
And the stronger the polarity
between the north pole
and the south pole,
the stronger there
is an invisible
electromagnetic field
that exists around the magnet.
You can't see that field with
your senses, but it exists.
And, in fact, if you
were to take a magnet
and place it on top
of metal shavings,
those metal shavings would
begin to organize themselves
right in the patterns of
the electromagnetic field--
energy having an
effect on matter.
Your body is also a magnet.
It has a north pole
and a south pole,
and Asian cultures
have known about this
for thousands of years.
Some of the research
that was done
at Yale University in the
'40s and studying eggs
of different vertebrates.
When they studied
those eggs, they
found that 100% of the time that
the positive charge was always
at the head, and the negative
charge was always at the tail,
meaning that there is an
invisible electromagnetic field
that is actually in
the shape of the egg.
Well, the body has
the same mechanisms.
We know that by the
time we're 35 years old,
most of our energy is stored
in the body subconsciously
and 5% is stored in
the brain and the mind.
Why?
Because if you're thinking
certain thoughts that
are producing certain
chemicals that
make you feel a certain way,
and those thoughts are connected
to anger, or aggression,
or fear, or guilt,
or suffering shame, you're
taking thought and beginning
to store it as energy by feeling
the same emotion in these lower
centers of the body.
So then, by the
same means, the more
we live by these first
three centers in our body,
the more we are drawing
from this invisible field
of light and information and
turning it into chemistry.
We're causing the very field
around our body to shrink.
And now we're becoming more
matter and less energy,
more particle and less wave.
These first three centers
are energy consumers,
so we're drawing from the field
and turning it into chemistry.
We're squandering
our very life force.
So now we're like
a piece of metal
that no longer has an
electromagnetic field
or a piece of metal
that's no longer a magnet.
And now we have all
this energy stored
in the body and a
very little bit amount
of energy stored in the brain.
So then there's gotta be
a way to pull the mind out
of the body, and to deliver that
energy right back in the brain,
and take all the
energy that you use
for making a baby, all the
energy that you use to digest
a meal, all the energy that
you use to react to someone
or something, and instead
of releasing it out,
we want to draw it
up into the brain.
So then the breath is the way
that we deliver energy back
to the brain.
Cerebrospinal fluid is
made of proteins and salts
and solution.
And if you take
proteins and salts,
and you drop them
in solution, they
develop a charge,
either a positive charge
or a negative charge.
They gain or lose electrons.
So now, when you do this
breath, and you begin to inhale,
and you squeeze those
muscles, the act
of squeezing those muscles,
and breathing, and coordinating
that act begins to move
that cerebrospinal fluid
towards your brain.
Well, if you take a charged
molecule and you accelerate it,
you are going to produce
an external field called
an inductance field.
If you move several
charged molecules,
you'll create a bigger
inductance field.
And once you begin to move
energy like that, just
like a magnet, you
begin to produce
what's called a torus field.
And many things in
nature, from the shape
of an apple to a universe to an
egg resemble this torus field.
Most people have most
of their energy stored
in their first three centers.
And just like drawing
fluid up a straw,
we are pulling that energy
with one slow, steady breath
through our nose in the
attempt to deliver that energy
right up to the pineal gland.
And once that energy moves
from the body to the brain,
and it begins to produce
more energy in the brain,
we should begin to see the
same effect like a magnet.
And it's the intrinsic
breath, the contraction
of those muscles along with
the slow, steady breath
and having our
attention on the target
that once that energy
begins to move,
something amazing happens.
There is a activation of the
sympathetic nervous system.
And when the sympathetic
nervous system is activated,
now it's taking all that
energy that's normally
stored in those first
three centers, the energy
that it takes to make
a baby, the energy
to digest a meal, the energy
to run from a predator
or to react to
someone or something,
and now that energy is
traveling up to the brain.
And the sympathetic
nervous system switches on.
And once it's
switched on, there's
an arousal that takes place.
And that energy moves
right up to the brain.
And once it reaches
the brain, it
begins to produce an external
electromagnetic field.
The energy at the base of
the spine is a lot slower.
As it moves up, the
energy gets faster.
And once that energy moves
from the base of the spine
all the way up to the
brain, just like a magnet,
we're going to begin to produce
an ambient electromagnetic
field.
The pineal gland has tiny little
cilia, hair-like extensions all
around it.
When you hold your
breath and you finally
let your breath out, and you
allow that cerebrospinal fluid
to accelerate, the acceleration
of that cerebrospinal fluid
begins to stimulate and
tickle those little cilia.
And as it begins to
become stimulated,
the pineal gland
begins to release
very sacred
chemicals, which we'll
talk about in the next episode.
So as you inhale and
draw that energy up,
once the sympathetic nervous
system switches on and merges
with the parasympathetic
nervous system,
the person is going to release
an enormous amount of energy
up into the brain.
Now, there's a gate
at the brainstem
called the thalamic gate.
And that gate
typically is closed.
And it participates with a
system called the Reticular
Activating System, or the RAS.
Now, the RAS is responsible
for levels of awareness.
If your cat is in the kitchen
and knocks something over
or you hear somebody outside
in the middle of the night,
it's the reticular
activating system
that brings you to a
greater level of awareness.
But the majority of the
time, the stimulation
is coming from our
senses, what we're hearing
or what we're seeing.
Now, when the arousal of the
sympathetic nervous system
happens this way, once
that energy moves up
and that gate opens up, it
moves right up into the brain.
And now the brain goes into a
super conscious or super aware
state, and the brainwave
patterns that are created
are called gamma
brainwave patterns.
And gamma brainwave
patterns are associated
with super consciousness
or super awareness.
And now the person has an
activation in their brain,
and they're super
conscious, super aware,
but the feelings and the
arousal is more like bliss,
more like ecstasy.
And the person is having
a tremendous release
of energy into the brain.
And in a sense
then, they're almost
having an orgasm in their brain.
And that is the release
of the Kundalini.
Now that you have an
understanding of pineal gland
and how to activate it,
in the next episode,
we'll talk about how the
pineal gland once switched
on acts as a radio receiver
to pick up information
beyond the senses into
meaningful, lucid imagery,
the same way that a TV antenna
picks up frequency and decodes
it into pictures.
In other words, we'll
uncover the science
behind bridging the physics
of frequency and energy
with our biology and our brain.
Stay tuned because I'll be
showing you actual brain
scans in real time to prove
to you that it's possible.
I'm your host, Dr. Joe
Dispenza for "Rewired."
And I hope to see you in
the next episode, where
we go beyond the ordinary
into the extraordinary.
[MUSIC PLAYING]